\chapter{Representative numerical simulations -- II}
\label{numerical-simulations-2}

The theoretical framework developed in the preceding chapter resulted
in a set of coupled partial differential equations governing the
interrelated mechanics, mass transport and biochemistry pertinent to
biological tissue growth. In order to demonstrate the applicability of
the theory, this chapter presents the results of several illustrative
numerical experiments posed within a corresponding computational
framework retaining all aspects of the coupling between the equations.

The chapter begins by providing some insight into the numerical
methods used to solve the coupled equations in Section~\ref{eu%
  -computational-model}. The first set of examples, presented in
Section~\ref{simple-physics}, serve to illustrate basic aspects of the
coupled physics underlying biphasic models for tissue mechanics. In
Section~\ref{biphasic-examples-2}, the biphasic model parameters are
tailored to be more representative of experimental studies on the
mechanics of tendons, and aspects of the time- and rate-dependent
behaviour of the model are explored and compared with experimental
results. The final example presented in this chapter provides a
straightforward extension of the theory to model the effects of the
mechanical environment on growing tumours (Section~\ref{tumour%
  -growth}), evidencing the generality of the proposed formulation.

\section{Introducing the computational model}
\label{eu-computational-model}

The mathematical formulation developed in Chapter~\ref{eulerian%
  -perspective} has been implemented in a finite element setting using
{\tt COMSOL Multiphysics},\footnote{\href {http://www.comsol.com/}
  {http://www.comsol.com/}} a computational environment for solving
coupled systems of partial differential equations. For simplicity, the
numerical implementation is in two spatial dimensions assuming a state
of plain strain, and it uses triangular elements of order 2 (quadratic
elements) to approximate the displacement field of the solid phase,
and triangular elements of order 1 (linear elements) to approximate
all other field variables, including the fluid velocity and
concentration. A representative unstructured mesh, used in the
computations on a unit square domain in Section~\ref{simple-physics},
is shown in Figure~\ref{egmesh2d} and consists of 3267 elements.

\begin{figure}[ht]
  \centering
  \includegraphics[width=0.8\textwidth]{images/examples/%
    eulerian/mesh}
  \caption{A representative unstructured finite element mesh used in
    the computations.}
  \label{egmesh2d}
\end{figure}

In the numerical implementation presented in Chapter~\ref{numerical%
  -simulations-1}, a simplified form of the balance of momentum was
imposed by treating the tissue as a whole and solving a summation of
Equation~(\ref{localbalanceofmomentum}) over all species. This
simplification necessitated additional assumptions on the underlying
micro-mechanics, and these were discussed in
Section~\ref{constriction-1}. In contrast, the implementation used in
this chapter solves the {\em detailed} momentum balance equations;
enforcing the balance of momentum for each species separately. The
coupling between the mechanics equations of the individual species is
introduced by specifying momentum transfer terms, $\bq^{\iota}$,
arising from frictional interaction as discussed in
Section~\ref{eu-interaction-forces}.

The balance of mass~(\ref{localbalanceofmass}) and
momentum~(\ref{localbalanceofmomentum}) equations for the solid
collagen are solved in the reference configuration of the tissue,
$\Omega_{0}$, and the balance of mass~(\ref{eu-localbalanceofmass})
and momentum~(\ref{eu-localbalanceofmomentum}) equations for the fluid
phase are solved in the current configuration, $\Omega_{t}$. Recall
that this choice is justified because we know the reference
configuration of the solid phase of the tissue. These equations, along
with the saturation constraint discussed below, are solved
simultaneously for the for the solid
concentration,~$\rho_{0}^{\mathrm{c}}$, and
displacement,~$\bu^{\mathrm{c}}$; and the fluid
concentration,~$\rho^{\mathrm{f}}$, velocity,~$\bv^{\mathrm{f}}$, and
pressure,~$p^{\mathrm{f}}$. Variable-order backward difference
formulae \citep{leveque2007} are used for forwarding the equations
through time.

In the interest of generality, the formulation and corresponding
implementation presented in Chapters~\ref{lagrangian-perspective} and
\ref{numerical-simulations-1} allowed for the possibility of
cavitation in tissues under certain ex~vivo/in~vitro
conditions. However, since it is well established that under normal
physiological conditions soft tissues are fully saturated by the
fluid, this condition will be imposed in the following calculations.

The concentration of each species~$\iota$ can be expressed as the
product of two non-negative scalar fields: $\rho^\iota = \phi^\iota
\tilde{\rho}^\iota$, where $\phi^\iota$ is the volume fraction and
$\tilde{\rho}^\iota$ is the intrinsic density of species~$\iota$ in
$\Omega_{t}$. The mixture is said to be saturated if the total volume
fraction, \mbox{$\phi = \sum\limits_{\iota}\phi^\iota = 1$}
\citep{passmanetal}. Since the solute species are present only in very
low concentrations, the preceding condition can be suitably
approximated by:\footnote{The saturation condition, as stated in
  Equation (\ref{eu-saturationconstraint}), incorporates an implicit
  assumption that the solid and fluid phases of the tissue are
  individually {\em intrinsically} incompressible. This means that
  their intrinsic densities, $\tilde{\rho}^\iota$, do not change under
  load, and this is a common assumption employed in the soft tissue
  mechanics literature. (See, for e.g., \citet{mowetal1980} and
  \citet{ateshian07}.)}

\begin{equation}
\frac{\left(\rho_{0}^{\mathrm{c}}/J\right)}
{\tilde{\rho}^{\mathrm{c}}} + 
\frac{\rho^{\mathrm{f}}}{\tilde{\rho}^{\mathrm{f}}} = 1.
\label{eu-saturationconstraint}
\end{equation}

\noindent In this computational implementation, the fluid
pressure,~$p^{\mathrm{f}}$, is not constitutively specified in terms
of the current concentration of the fluid, and instead serves as an
indeterminate Lagrange multiplier to impose the saturation
constraint~(\ref{eu-saturationconstraint}).

For simplicity, in the calculations that follow, the strain energy
function used for the elastic portion of the response of the solid
collagen is the model of Mooney and Rivlin \citep{mooney1940},

\begin{equation}
\hat{\psi^{\mathrm{c}}} (\bC^{\mathrm{e}}) = \sum\limits_{i,j=0}^{n}
C_{ij} (I_{1}-3)^{i} (I_{2}-3)^{j}
\label{mooney-rivlin-model}
\end{equation}

\noindent (where $I_{1}$ and $I_{2}$ are the first and second
principal invariants of the elastic right Cauchy-Greent tensor,
$\bC^{\mathrm{e}}$), suitably decomposed into volumetric and isochoric
parts. A mixed displacement-pressure \citep{ZienkTay:89} formulation
is used to treat the near-incompressibility of the solid phase. Also
for simplicity, the fluid is assumed to be ideal, i.e. the fluid
viscosity, $\mu^{\mathrm{f}}=0$.

\section{Some simple physical tests}
\label{simple-physics}

The preliminary calculations presented in this section aim to
illustrate basic aspects of the coupled physics that arise in mixture
models that include only two non-reacting phases: a solid and a
fluid. In these calculations, the tissue is assumed to be $1$~mm thick
and the material model for the solid phase uses the Mooney-Rivlin
strain energy function~(\ref{mooney-rivlin-model}) with just one term
having the material constant \mbox{$C_{10} = 0.8$~MPa.}

\subsection{An inflating balloon}
\label{balloon}

This example studies the inflation of the tissue as a result of
pressure-gradient driven influx of fluid.  The total duration of the
test is 3~s. The initial concentrations of the solid collagen and
fluid phases at all points in a unit square domain \mbox{(1~mm
  $\times$ 1~mm)} are 500~kg.m$^{-3}$, and their intrinsic densities
are 1000~kg.m$^{-3}$. Thus, each phase has an initial volume fraction
of 0.5. At the initial time, the solid displacement and velocity
fields, and the fluid velocity and pressure fields are each 0 in their
respective units at all points in the domain.

The boundary conditions for this problem correspond to holding the
bottom edge of the tissue fixed to prevent rigid body motion, and
forcing inflow of the fluid at this bottom edge while disallowing
outflow at any of the other edges, simulating an inflating balloon. In
particular:

\begin{itemize}
\item For the fluid, the boundary condition on the bottom edge
  specifies that its pressure increases linearly in time from 0~MPa to
  0.3~MPa during the duration of this test. The boundary condition for
  the fluid on the other three edges specifies that its velocity field
  is the same as that of the solid, $\bv^{\mathrm{f}} =
  \bv^{\mathrm{c}}$, disallowing outflow of fluid.
\item For the solid, the boundary condition on the bottom edge fixes
  the components of the solid displacement to 0~mm for the entire
  duration of the test. On the other three edges, following literature
  on fluid-structure interaction \citep{doneaetal2004}, there is a
  traction boundary condition on the solid that reads,
  $\bt^{\mathrm{c}}=\Bsigma^{\mathrm{c}} \bn = -p^{\mathrm{f}} \bn$,
  suitably pulled-back to the reference configuration. Here, $\bn$ is
  the normal to $\Omega_{t}$, and this condition relates the stress in
  the solid to the pressure in the fluid along the edges where there
  is no relative motion between the solid and the fluid.\footnote{In
    contrast to the example discussed in Section~\ref{swelling-1},
    which used the notion of the growth portion of the deformation
    gradient of the fluid, $\bF^{\mathrm{g}^\mathrm{f}}$, to cause
    kinematic swelling of the domain, in this example, it is this
    interaction between the solid and fluid stresses that causes the
    domain to swell.}
\end{itemize}

In this example, the frictional coefficient tensor is assumed to have
a relatively small magnitude ($\bD^{\mathrm{fc}} =
1\mathrm{e}^{-5}\ \bone$~MPa.s.mm$^{-2}$) because we are currently
more interested in observing the swelling of the domain due to fluid
influx at one edge rather than the frictional interaction between the
phases.

Figures~\ref{swelling-balloon-image-0p0}--\ref{swelling-balloon-image-3p0}
show snapshots of the swelling domain during the course of the
test. The colour contours provide the horizontal displacement field of
the solid (in~mm) and the arrows provide the direction of the solid
velocity field. The increasing fluid pressure boundary condition on
the bottom edge causes an inflow of fluid, and the inability of the
fluid to flow out of other boundaries corresponds to a boundary traction
on the solid, causing the domain to swell outward as seen in
the figures.  Because the computation was run with dynamics, there is
initially a slight oscillation in the velocity field due to wave
propagation in the fluid (not apparent in the plots) which fade in the
first 0.4~s.

\begin{figure}[!hptb]
\centering
\includegraphics[width=0.9\textwidth]{images/examples/%
eulerian/swelling/balloon-swell-0p0}
\caption{The inflating balloon at time $t=0$ s.} 
\label{swelling-balloon-image-0p0}
\end{figure}

\begin{figure}[!hptb]
\centering
\includegraphics[width=0.9\textwidth]{images/examples/%
eulerian/swelling/balloon-swell-0p6}
\caption{The inflating balloon at time $t=0.6$ s.} 
\label{swelling-balloon-image-0p6}
\end{figure}

\begin{figure}[!hptb]
\centering
\includegraphics[width=0.9\textwidth]{images/examples/%
eulerian/swelling/balloon-swell-1p2}
\caption{The inflating balloon at time $t=1.2$ s.} 
\label{swelling-balloon-image-1p2}
\end{figure}

\begin{figure}[!hptb]
\centering
\includegraphics[width=0.9\textwidth]{images/examples/%
eulerian/swelling/balloon-swell-1p8}
\caption{The inflating balloon at time $t=1.8$ s.} 
\label{swelling-balloon-image-1p8}
\end{figure}

\begin{figure}[!hptb]
\centering
\includegraphics[width=0.9\textwidth]{images/examples/%
eulerian/swelling/balloon-swell-2p4}
\caption{The inflating balloon at time $t=2.4$ s.} 
\label{swelling-balloon-image-2p4}
\end{figure}

\begin{figure}[!hptb]
\centering
\includegraphics[width=0.9\textwidth]{images/examples/%
eulerian/swelling/balloon-swell-3p0}
\caption{The inflating balloon at time $t=3.0$ s.} 
\label{swelling-balloon-image-3p0}
\end{figure}

\clearpage

\subsection{The tissue under constriction}
\label{constriction-2}

In the previous numerical experiment, we studied the deformation of
the tissue under an influx of fluid. In this example, we turn our
attention to fluid flow fields induced by the deformation of the solid
phase of the tissue and frictional interactions between the
phases. The initial condition for this problem is identical to the
previous case, i.e., the tissue is at rest initially and the initial
concentrations of the solid collagen and fluid phases at all points in
the unit square domain \mbox{(1~mm $\times$ 1~mm)} are
500~kg.m$^{-3}$. As before, the total duration of the test is 3~s.

\begin{figure}[!hptb]
\centering
\psfrag{u}{$u$}
\psfrag{y}{$y$}
\psfrag{t}{$t$}
\includegraphics[width=0.8\textwidth]{images/examples/%
  eulerian/constriction/displacement-load}
\caption{The magnitude of the displacement load on the vertical edges
  of the tissue.}
\label{eu-constrict-disp-load}
\end{figure}

The boundary conditions for this problem correspond to immersing the
tissue in a bath and applying a displacement load on the vertical
edges so as to constrict the tissue in order to observe the fluid
flow. In particular, the fluid is subjected to a pressure boundary
condition on all four edges; where the pressure of the fluid is
equated to that of the bath,~0~MPa. For the solid, the bottom edge is
held fixed and the top edge is traction free. The left edge is
subjected to the temporally-varying constrictive horizontal
displacement (in~mm) visualised in Figure~\ref{eu-constrict%
  -disp-load}. The figure shows the horizontal displacement being
increased linearly in time for the first 1~s and then held fixed for
the remainder of the test. The right edge is subjected to the negative
of this load. In this example, the magnitude of the frictional
coefficient tensor is significantly greater than the previous example
($\bD^{\mathrm{fc}} = \bone$~MPa.s.mm$^{-2}$) and the effects of the
frictional interaction between the phases are manifest in the results.

Figures~\ref{constrict-image-0p0}--\ref{constrict-image-3p0} show
snapshots of the constricted tissue during the course of the test. The
colour contours provide the horizontal displacement field of the solid
(in~mm) which remains fixed after the first 1~s of the test. The
arrows provide the direction and magnitude of the fluid velocity
field. Their lengths scale linearly with the magnitude of the fluid
velocity field and the longest arrow corresponds to a fluid velocity
magnitude of 7.03e-3 mm.s$^{-1}$. This fluid flow is mainly driven by
a combination of frictional interaction with the solid phase and the
saturation condition. The plots are asymmetric in the vertical
direction because the bottom edge is held fixed. Observe that the
fluid velocity grows with increasing constriction and gradually decays
after the constriction of the solid has come to an end at 1~s (this is
clearly seen in seen in Figure~\ref{velocity-evolution%
  -dynamic}). There is also a nominal relaxation of the top face after
the constriction phase, as observed in the example in
Section~\ref{constriction-1}.

As in the previous example, effects from the dynamics were observed in
this case as well, and an equivalent quasistatic calculation was
performed for comparison. When the vertical fluid velocity is tracked
at the centre of the domain for the duration of the test in both these
cases, it is observed that the dynamic case decays gradually and has
oscillations (Figure~\ref{velocity-evolution-dynamic}) while the
quasistatic case reaches a higher magnitude, and decays nearly
instantaneously without manifesting oscillations
(Figure~\ref{velocity-evolution-quasistatic}).

\begin{figure}[!hptb]
\centering
\includegraphics[width=0.9\textwidth]{images/examples/%
eulerian/constriction/constrict-0p0}
\caption{The constricted tissue at time $t=0$ s.} 
\label{constrict-image-0p0}
\end{figure}

\begin{figure}[!hptb]
\centering
\includegraphics[width=0.9\textwidth]{images/examples/%
eulerian/constriction/constrict-0p32}
\caption{The constricted tissue at time $t=0.32$ s.} 
\label{constrict-image-0p32}
\end{figure}

\begin{figure}[!hptb]
\centering
\includegraphics[width=0.9\textwidth]{images/examples/%
eulerian/constriction/constrict-0p66}
\caption{The constricted tissue at time $t=0.66$ s.} 
\label{constrict-image-0p66}
\end{figure}

\begin{figure}[!hptb]
\centering
\includegraphics[width=0.9\textwidth]{images/examples/%
eulerian/constriction/constrict-1p0}
\caption{The constricted tissue at time $t=1.0$ s.} 
\label{constrict-image-1p0}
\end{figure}

\begin{figure}[!hptb]
\centering
\includegraphics[width=0.9\textwidth]{images/examples/%
eulerian/constriction/constrict-2p0}
\caption{The constricted tissue at time $t=2.0$ s.} 
\label{constrict-image-2p0}
\end{figure}

\begin{figure}[!hptb]
\centering
\includegraphics[width=0.9\textwidth]{images/examples/%
eulerian/constriction/constrict-3p0}
\caption{The constricted tissue at time $t=3.0$ s.} 
\label{constrict-image-3p0}
\end{figure}

\begin{figure}[!hptb]
\centering
\includegraphics[width=0.6\textwidth,angle=270]{images/examples/%
eulerian/constriction/constrict-vel-drop-dynamic}
\caption{Dynamic evolution of the vertical fluid velocity at the
  centre point.}
\label{velocity-evolution-dynamic}
\end{figure}

\begin{figure}[!hptb]
\centering
\includegraphics[width=0.6\textwidth,angle=270]{images/examples/%
eulerian/constriction/constrict-vel-drop-quasistatic}
\caption{Quasistatic evolution of the vertical fluid velocity at the
  centre point.}
\label{velocity-evolution-quasistatic}
\end{figure}

\clearpage

\section{Examples exploring the biphasic nature of porous soft tissue}
\label{biphasic-examples-2}

\textbullet\ Now that we're reasonably confident about the fluid flow
fields and have an idea of its effects on the mechanics, we proceed to
tailor the material model, geometry and constants to better represent
actual cases.

%% The model geometry, based on the experimental work of \citet{Calve:04}
%% on the engineering and characterisation of tendon-like constructs (see
%% Figure~\ref{engconst}), is a cylinder 12 mm in length and 1 mm$^2$ in
%% cross-sectional area. The corresponding finite element mesh using 3840
%% hexahedral elements is shown in Figure~\ref{egmesh}. The constitutive
%% relation for the solid collagen phase uses a strain energy arising
%% from the eight-chain model incorporating worm-like chains, as
%% discussed in Section~\ref{anisotropic-network-elasticity} . The
%% constitutive relation for the (ideal) fluid stress follows (\ref{Pf})
%% with,

\subsection{Stress relaxation}
\label{stress-relaxation}

\textbullet\ Set up the boundary conditions relevant to the
case. Basically pull and hold, and no outflow at the top and
bottom.

\subsubsection{Under different rates of loading}
\label{modifying-load-rates}

\textbullet\ In order to differentiate the effect of load rate. The
results show, as expected, that the faster-pulled case is stiffer,
arising from the higher force from the frictional interaction term.

\begin{figure}[!hptb]
\centering
\includegraphics[width=0.6\textwidth,angle=270]{images/examples/%
eulerian/pulling/plots/poro-elastic/poro-stress-relax-0p01}
\caption{Dynamic poroelastic model, $\dot{\epsilon}=0.01$ Hz, $D=1.037$
  MPa.s.mm$^{-1}$.}
\label{poro-stress-relax-0p01}
\end{figure}

\begin{figure}[!hptb]
\centering
\includegraphics[width=0.6\textwidth,angle=270]{images/examples/%
eulerian/pulling/plots/poro-elastic/poro-stress-relax-0p02}
\caption{Dynamic poroelastic model, $\dot{\epsilon}=0.02$ Hz, $D=1.037$
  MPa.s.mm$^{-1}$.}
\label{poro-stress-relax-0p02}
\end{figure}

\subsubsection{Comparison with representative viscoelastic curves}
\label{viscoelastic-stress-relaxation}

\textbullet\ This calculation uses a linear-viscoelastic model and is
presented for qualitative comparison. We're interested, as mentioned
in a Section before, in the inelastic behaviour of tissues. The goal
of these examples are not to solve the final problem, but to show that
different cases can be solved reasonably within the framework and show
different results qualitatively and quantitatively. Notice that the
viscoelastic curve does the same general thing.

\begin{figure}[!hptb]
\centering
\includegraphics[width=0.6\textwidth,angle=270]{images/examples/%
eulerian/pulling/plots/visco-elastic/visco-stress-relax-0p02-t0p3}
\caption{Dynamic viscoelastic model, $\dot{\epsilon}=0.02$ Hz,
  $\tau=0.3$ s.}
\label{visco-stress-relax-0p02-t0p3}
\end{figure}

\textbullet\ Also, the nonlinear case can also be trivially handled,
and it's comparison with experiment is shown below.

\subsubsection{Non-linear viscoelasticity}
\label{non-linear-viscoelasticity}

\begin{figure}[!hptb]
\centering
\includegraphics[width=0.6\textwidth,angle=270]{images/examples/%
eulerian/nonlinear-viscoelasticity/provenzano-data-comparison}
\caption{The non-linear time constants fit to experiment.} 
\label{provenzano-data-fit}
\end{figure}

\begin{figure}[!hptb]
\centering
\includegraphics[width=0.6\textwidth,angle=270]{images/examples/%
eulerian/nonlinear-viscoelasticity/nonlinear-viscoelasticity-stress-relaxation}
\caption{Stress relaxation under nonlinear viscoelasticity.}
\label{nonlinear-viscoelasticity-stress-relaxation}
\end{figure}

\clearpage

\subsection{Hysteresis in the cyclic stress-strain response}
\label{hysteresis}

\textbullet\ Now that we've established a simple pull and hold, we
move onto a more complicated pull and unload. Talk about the boundary
conditions and perhaps provide the 2 experimental results first?

\textbullet\ Since quasistatic and dynamic were found important, we
look at those two cases for a certain ratio of fluid to
solid. Clearly, there is a difference.

\subsubsection{Quasistatic vs. dynamic}
\label{quasistatic-vs-dynamic}

\begin{figure}[!hptb]
\centering
\includegraphics[width=0.6\textwidth,angle=270]{images/examples/%
eulerian/pulling/plots/poro-elastic/medium-hysteresis-static-0p01-d1p037}
\caption{Quasistatic poroelastic model, $\dot{\epsilon}=0.01$ Hz, $D=1.037$
  MPa.s.mm$^{-1}$.}
\label{medium-hysteresis-static-0p01-d1p037}
\end{figure}

\begin{figure}[!hptb]
\centering
\includegraphics[width=0.6\textwidth,angle=270]{images/examples/%
eulerian/pulling/plots/poro-elastic/medium-hysteresis-dynamic-0p01-d1p037}
\caption{Dynamic poroelastic model, $\dot{\epsilon}=0.01$ Hz, $D=1.037$
  MPa.s.mm$^{-1}$.}
\label{medium-hysteresis-dynamic-0p01-d1p037}
\end{figure}

\textbullet\ Note that the fluid-sloshy-effects go away during the
higher strain ranges where the solid is substantially stiffer.

\subsubsection{Changing load-rates and friction coefficients}
\label{load-rates-and-friction-coefficients}

\textbullet\ We now proceed to change the load rates/friction
coefficients in order to observe effects. Clearly, slower tests tend
the process toward equilibrium and it tends to become elastic,
reducing the dissipation and area under the curve.

\textbullet\ With the fluid (relative) velocities fixed (by the
boundary conditions), increasing
the frictional coefficient 10-fold increases the effects of the
fluid-sloshing dynamics substantially.

\begin{figure}[!hptb]
\centering
\includegraphics[width=0.6\textwidth,angle=270]{images/examples/%
eulerian/pulling/plots/poro-elastic/medium-hysteresis-dynamic-0p001-d1p037}
\caption{Dynamic poroelastic model, $\dot{\epsilon}=0.001$ Hz, $D=1.037$
  MPa.s.mm$^{-1}$.}
\label{medium-hysteresis-dynamic-0p001-d1p037}
\end{figure}

\begin{figure}[!hptb]
\centering
\includegraphics[width=0.6\textwidth,angle=270]{images/examples/%
eulerian/pulling/plots/poro-elastic/medium-hysteresis-dynamic-0p01-d10p37}
\caption{Dynamic poroelastic model, $\dot{\epsilon}=0.01$ Hz, $D=10.37$
  MPa.s.mm$^{-1}$.}
\label{medium-hysteresis-dynamic-0p01-d10p37}
\end{figure}

\subsubsection{Changing the overall shape and stress range}
\label{changing-shape}

\textbullet\ All the plots shown thus far have had the same general
shape, but experiments show different things for different tissues at
different ages. We can easily model this by changing the material
parameters to change the stress-ranges and shapes.

\begin{figure}[!hptb]
\centering
\includegraphics[width=0.6\textwidth,angle=270]{images/examples/%
eulerian/pulling/plots/poro-elastic/low-hysteresis-dynamic-0p01-d1p037}
\caption{Dynamic poroelastic model, $\dot{\epsilon}=0.01$ Hz, $D=1.037$
  MPa.s.mm$^{-1}$.}
\label{low-hysteresis-dynamic-0p01-d1p037}
\end{figure}

\subsubsection{Comparison with representative linear viscoelastic
  curves}
\label{viscoelastic-hysteresis}

And, to compare, here are two plots (one for each set of material
properties) using a linear viscoelastic model. Clearly, the visco case
misses the noisyness arising from fluid-sloshing which the poro case
captures. Therefore, combinations must be explored.

\begin{figure}[!hptb]
\centering
\includegraphics[width=0.6\textwidth,angle=270]{images/examples/%
eulerian/pulling/plots/visco-elastic/medium-hysteresis-visco-0p01-t0p3}
\caption{Dynamic viscoelastic model, $\dot{\epsilon}=0.01$ Hz,
  $\tau=0.3$ s.}
\label{medium-hysteresis-visco-0p01-t0p3}
\end{figure}

\begin{figure}[!hptb]
\centering
\includegraphics[width=0.6\textwidth,angle=270]{images/examples/%
eulerian/pulling/plots/visco-elastic/low-hysteresis-visco-0p01-t0p7}
\caption{Dynamic viscoelastic model, $\dot{\epsilon}=0.01$ Hz,
  $\tau=0.7$ s.}
\label{low-hysteresis-visco-0p01-t0p7}
\end{figure}

\clearpage

\section{Tumour growth}
\label{tumour-growth}

\textbullet\ Introduce the general lack of direct experimental
backing here. And point to the fact that the example will be gradually
built up from scratch to separate effects.

\subsection{Isotropic swelling}
\label{tumour-isotropic-swelling}

\textbullet\ One of the primary focuses of this work is growth, and this includes
kinematic swelling. Try to clarify that the cell concentration is
uniform, and growth is of the collagen network + cells. As a result of
this uniform cell concentration and growth, the solid tends to swell.

\textbullet\ The plots show the radial displacements at two times, and
the evolution of the area.

\begin{figure}[!hptb]
\centering
\includegraphics[width=0.9\textwidth]{images/examples/%
eulerian/cancer/isotropic-swelling-0}
\caption{A semicircular tumour at time $t=0$ days.}
\label{tumour-isotropic-swelling-0}
\end{figure}

\begin{figure}[!hptb]
\centering
\includegraphics[width=0.9\textwidth]{images/examples/%
eulerian/cancer/isotropic-swelling-100}
\caption{A semicircular tumour at time $t=100$ days.}
\label{tumour-isotropic-swelling-100}
\end{figure}

\begin{figure}[!hptb]
\centering
\includegraphics[width=0.6\textwidth,angle=270]{images/examples/%
eulerian/cancer/isotropic-swelling-area-evolution}
\caption{The area of the tumour evolving over 100 days.}
\label{tumour-isotropic-area-evolution}
\end{figure}

\clearpage

\subsection{Constrained by a wall}
\label{wall-constraint}

\textbullet\ Now, we're interested in the case where there is a boundary condition
arising from a wall or pressure of some sort, and since we're working
with a dynamic calculation, arbitrary introduction of the wall at some
time is numerically bad. So, we move to soft contact mechanics and
have an exponential rule like so that kicks in gradually. The cells
still don't do any mechanics, yet.

\textbullet\ The plot shows the velocity of the growing tumour
(arrows) and the compressive horizontal stress built up at a certain
time. Notice that the velocity in those regions are zeroing out, as
they should. The temporal variation at that end point is plotted separately.

\begin{figure}[!hptb]
\centering
\includegraphics[width=0.9\textwidth]{images/examples/%
eulerian/cancer/constrained-swelling-120}
\caption{The growing tumour constrained by a wall at time $t=100$ days.}
\label{tumour-constrained-swelling-120}
\end{figure}

\begin{figure}[!hptb]
\centering
\includegraphics[width=0.6\textwidth,angle=270]{images/examples/%
eulerian/cancer/constrained-stress-evolution}
\caption{The horizontal stress in the tumour evolving over 120 days.}
\label{tumour-constrained-stress-evolution}
\end{figure}

\subsection{The mechanics of cells}
\label{cell-roles}

So far, we worked with no mechanics but there are two fundamental
things cells do.

\subsubsection{Inward tug}
\label{inward-tug}

\textbullet\ Cells pull inwards, following this law that says that an
optimal cell-ECM concentration is best for maximum inward
tuginess. Their stress now follows this rule motivated by this paper.

\textbullet\ As a result of uniform cell concentrations, we see
this. As a result of an (arbitrary) heterogeneous contribution, we see
something else. Note that the regions with higher cells pull in more.

\begin{figure}[!hptb]
\centering
\includegraphics[width=0.9\textwidth]{images/examples/%
eulerian/cancer/homogeneous-inward-tug}
\caption{Homogeneous inward tug due to a uniform distribution of cells.}
\label{tumour-homogeneous-inward-tug}
\end{figure}

\begin{figure}[!hptb]
\centering
\includegraphics[width=0.9\textwidth]{images/examples/%
eulerian/cancer/heterogeneous-inward-tug}
\caption{Heterogeneous inward tug due to a non-uniform distribution of cells.}
\label{tumour-heterogeneous-inward-tug}
\end{figure}

\clearpage

\subsection{Transport of the cells}
\label{cell-transport}

\textbullet\ So far, we assumed that the cell concentration remains
constant in time and space. Now we add an additional differential
equation (advection diffusion reaction governing its
movement). Diffusion is obvious, and the plots below show the cells
diffusing from a central bulb outwards while they proliferate.

\subsubsection{Diffusion and proliferation}
\label{cell-diffusion-proliferation}

\begin{figure}[!hptb]
\centering
\includegraphics[width=0.9\textwidth]{images/examples/%
eulerian/cancer/diffusing-proliferating-cells-0}
\caption{The cells diffusing and proliferating at time $t=0$ days.}
\label{tumour-diffusion-proliferation-0}
\end{figure}

\begin{figure}[!hptb]
\centering
\includegraphics[width=0.9\textwidth]{images/examples/%
eulerian/cancer/diffusing-proliferating-cells-33}
\caption{The cells diffusing and proliferating at time $t=33$ days.}
\label{tumour-diffusion-proliferation-33}
\end{figure}

\begin{figure}[!hptb]
\centering
\includegraphics[width=0.9\textwidth]{images/examples/%
eulerian/cancer/diffusing-proliferating-cells-67}
\caption{The cells diffusing and proliferating at time $t=67$ days.}
\label{tumour-diffusion-proliferation-67}
\end{figure}

\begin{figure}[!hptb]
\centering
\includegraphics[width=0.9\textwidth]{images/examples/%
eulerian/cancer/diffusing-proliferating-cells-100}
\caption{The cells diffusing and proliferating at time $t=100$ days.}
\label{tumour-diffusion-proliferation-100}
\end{figure}

\subsubsection{Cell haptotaxis}
\label{eu-cell-haptotaxis}

\textbullet\ But there is another mechanism for their movement, they
move along the gradients of ECM contributions. This is added as an
additional flux term to the calculation above, and the magnitude of
this mobility is motivated by this paper. Clearly, this effect is
less/more important than general diffusion.

\textbullet\ In order to kick this off, we start with an (arbitrary)
heterogeneous ECM concentration, as shown. Note that the cell inward
tug changes with the concentration, as noted by the sizes and
directions of the arrows.

\begin{figure}[!hptb]
\centering
\includegraphics[width=0.9\textwidth]{images/examples/%
eulerian/cancer/heterogeneous-ecm-concentration}
\caption{Heterogeneous extra-cellular matrix concentration.}
\label{heterogeneous-ecm-concentration}
\end{figure}

\textbullet\ And with this, we have (apart from proliferating and
diffusing), heading toward areas of higher ECM. In these calculations,
growth (swelling) has been turned off and the arrows show the inward
tug. 

\begin{figure}[!hptb]
\centering
\includegraphics[width=0.9\textwidth]{images/examples/%
eulerian/cancer/haptotaxis-proliferating-cells-0}
\caption{Proliferating cells undergoing diffusion and haptotaxis at time $t=0$ days.}
\label{tumour-haptotaxis-proliferation-0}
\end{figure}

\begin{figure}[!hptb]
\centering
\includegraphics[width=0.9\textwidth]{images/examples/%
eulerian/cancer/haptotaxis-proliferating-cells-3p3}
\caption{Proliferating cells undergoing diffusion and haptotaxis at time $t=3.3$ days.}
\label{tumour-haptotaxis-proliferation-3p3}
\end{figure}

\begin{figure}[!hptb]
\centering
\includegraphics[width=0.9\textwidth]{images/examples/%
eulerian/cancer/haptotaxis-proliferating-cells-6p7}
\caption{Proliferating cells undergoing diffusion and haptotaxis at time $t=6.7$ days.}
\label{tumour-haptotaxis-proliferation-6p7}
\end{figure}

\begin{figure}[!hptb]
\centering
\includegraphics[width=0.9\textwidth]{images/examples/%
eulerian/cancer/haptotaxis-proliferating-cells-10}
\caption{Proliferating cells undergoing diffusion and haptotaxis at time $t=10$ days.}
\label{tumour-haptotaxis-proliferation-10}
\end{figure}

\clearpage

\subsection{Combining everything}
\label{cacophonous-medley}

\textbullet\ We are finally ready to solve the problem we described
initially. The range of physics incorporated here include, diffusing,
proliferating and haptotacting cells, growth induced by them and
swelling, nutrient is a constant field, growth follows a simple rate
law, soft contact mechanics introduced by the wall.

\textbullet\ Clearly, regions with more cells grow faster, and the
plots show the x-displacement as a measure of swelling. Also, the
presence of the wall biases the growth toward the top and bottom as
seen in experiment. Currently, all this arises out of a growth law
that's independent of stress (isotropic swelling), but with careful
experimental work its form can be fixed. Compare this to the case
where the growth happened without a wall.

\begin{figure}[!hptb]
\centering
\includegraphics[width=0.9\textwidth]{images/examples/%
eulerian/cancer/growing-tumour-no-wall-4}
\caption{An unconstrained growing tumour at $t=4$ months.}
\label{tumour-growth-no-wall-4}
\end{figure}

\begin{figure}[!hptb]
\centering
\includegraphics[width=0.9\textwidth]{images/examples/%
eulerian/cancer/growing-tumour-0.eps}
\caption{A constrained growing tumour at $t=0$ months.}
\label{tumour-growth-constrained-0}
\end{figure}

\begin{figure}[!hptb]
\centering
\includegraphics[width=0.9\textwidth]{images/examples/%
eulerian/cancer/growing-tumour-1.eps}
\caption{A constrained growing tumour at $t=1$ months.}
\label{tumour-growth-constrained-1}
\end{figure}

\begin{figure}[!hptb]
\centering
\includegraphics[width=0.9\textwidth]{images/examples/%
eulerian/cancer/growing-tumour-2.eps}
\caption{A constrained growing tumour at $t=2$ months.}
\label{tumour-growth-constrained-2}
\end{figure}

\begin{figure}[!hptb]
\centering
\includegraphics[width=0.9\textwidth]{images/examples/%
eulerian/cancer/growing-tumour-3.eps}
\caption{A constrained growing tumour at $t=3$ months.}
\label{tumour-growth-constrained-3}
\end{figure}

\begin{figure}[!hptb]
\centering
\includegraphics[width=0.9\textwidth]{images/examples/%
eulerian/cancer/growing-tumour-4.eps}
\caption{A constrained growing tumour at $t=4$ months.}
\label{tumour-growth-constrained-4}
\end{figure}

\begin{figure}[!hptb]
\centering
\includegraphics[width=0.9\textwidth]{images/examples/%
eulerian/cancer/growing-tumour-5.eps}
\caption{A constrained growing tumour at $t=5$ months.}
\label{tumour-growth-constrained-5}
\end{figure}

% The move to the following perspective was motivated by the fact that
% the earlier formulation, and corresponding numerical examples (cite
% sections on role of mass balance in current conf., the deformation
% gradient split for the fluid, and the numerical example involving
% assumptions on deformation gradient of the fluid) involved
% quantities that, while reasonable from a 
% mathematical pint of view, did not correspond to physical quantities
% of interest in terms of physiological bvps. Point out that it's been
% 2--3 years of refining our understanding and trials with the
% previous code that's led to this point?

%\subsection{Flow fields under tension}
%\label{tension-flow} -- Can be moved in with the tension tests


%

% Local Variables:
% TeX-master: "thesis"
% mode: latex
% mode: flyspell
% End:
